#summary AM's primary DwC exporter

= Australian Museum: primary collection management system darwincore export =

== Introduction ==
This is an implementation of a darwincore export, for one of the [FcigDM FCIG-OZCAM participants].

== Artefacts and synopsis ==

<table cellpadding="4" cellspacing="0" border="1" width="90%">

<tr>
<td>*Item*</td>
<td>*Short URL*</td>
<td>*Details (or long URL)*</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>*This wiki page*</td>
<td>[http://goo.gl/w1Z9m]</td>
<td>[http://code.google.com/p/ala-datamob/wiki/FcigDM_AM]</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td valign="top">*Source data system*</td>
<td colspan="2" cellpadding="0">

|| Collection management software || [http://www.kesoftware.com/emu KE EMu on Linux] ||
|| Database backend || texpress ||
|| Exporter's execution environment || bash (linux command shell) ||
|| Adhoc query || texql ||
|| Bulk export method || texkfdump, texexport ||
|| Schema reporting || texdescribe ||
|| [DataStandardsDwC DwC] mapping || awk script ||
|| Compression, transmission || gzip, sftp to upload.ala.org.au ||

</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td valign="top">*Output data*</td>
<td colspan="2">[DataStandardsDwC Darwincore csv (simple-dwc) format] with non-standard FCIG extensions

|| institutionCode || "AM" ||
|| dcterms:type || "!PhysicalObject" ||
|| basisOfRecord || "!PreservedSpecimen" ||

Data availability:
|| AM data before export || [http://australianmuseum.net.au/Australian-Museum-Collection-Search] ||
|| AM data at export || not generally available - contact data manager ||
|| AM data after atlas (biocache) ingest || [http://biocache.ala.org.au/occurrences/search?fq=data_resource_uid:dr340# http://goo.gl/Gkiba] ||

</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td valign="top">*[http://code.google.com/p/ala-dataquality/wiki/CompletenessModel Completeness model]*</td>
<td>[http://goo.gl/dB4W6]</td>
<td>[https://docs.google.com/folder/d/0ByNWJFdh4pHZZTExOTU5ZTMtNjE4Yy00ODk0LWIxNzktOGRhZTczZDgxMmUz/edit Google docs -> Data management -> CompletenessDwC -> am-emu.dwccm.26]</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td valign="top">*Source code*</td>
<td>[http://goo.gl/kI0d8]</td>
<td>[http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am]</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td valign="top">*Usage doco*</td>
<td>[http://goo.gl/Aw6Zy]</td>
<td>[http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/am%20cms%20doco.20130103.pdf]</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td valign="top" rowspan="2">*Final status report*</td>
<td>[http://goo.gl/8E2b0]</td>
<td>[http://goo.gl/x9Yo1 Google docs ➢ Communications ➢ Data management ➢ Mobilisation reports] ➢ finalreport.am.odt</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>[http://goo.gl/tEioQ]</td>
<td>finalreport.am.pdf (under the same directory)</td>
</tr>

</table>


== Behavioural diagrams ==

_From usage documentation [http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/am%20cms%20doco.20130103.pdf]..._

There are five parts to the exporter:
  * the main script ([http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/dwcdm2.sh dwcdm2.sh]), 
  * the disciplines-list (disciplines-list), 
  * the sub-script ([http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/dwcdm2dsx.sh dwcdm2dsx.sh]), 
  * the data mapping scripts ([http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/ozdc_full.awk ozdc_full.awk], [http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/ozdc_id.awk ozdc_id.awk]), and
  * the update script (amupdate.sh).

=== dwcdm2.sh ===
The first export component is a bash shell script, /amexport/dwcdm2.sh, which is the entry point for running an
export – this script prepares the export directory, reads in disciplines-list and calls the sub-script dwcdm2dsx.sh
for each non-comment line (no leading #), bundles the export on completion and sends to specified servers using
sftp.

The second export component is the text file, /amexport/disciplines-list, which controls the behaviour of the main
script dwdm2.sh. Disciplines matching the !CatDiscipline field should be entered here, one per line. Comment
lines (beginning with #) and blank lines are ignored. Comment out disciplines to do a partial export. If you delete or
rename this file, dwcdm2.sh will rebuild it from the database.
Note: this is a costly operation (roughly 2 hours) and no subsequent exports will occur, to allow for any unwanted
disciplines to be excluded by deletion or comment.

[http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/dwcdm2.sh http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/wiki/FcigDM/am-dwcdm2.sh.png]<br>
_Activity diagram for [http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/dwcdm2.sh]_

=== dwcdm2dsx.sh ===
The third export component is a bash shell script, /amexport/dwcdm2dsx.sh, which is called by dwcdm2.sh for
each line in the disciplines-list, and handles exporting the full list of current id's, as well as the partial or full export
depending. Scripts ozdc_full.awk and ozdc_id.awk are called by dwcdm2dsx.sh, and handle mapping between
an emu export and a darwincore csv. The output file DISCIPLINE-dwcid.csv is converted by ozdc_id.awk while
DISCIPLINE-dwcdata.csv is converted by ozdc_full.awk.

[http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/dwcdm2dsx.sh http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/wiki/FcigDM/am-dwcdm2dsx.sh.png]<br>
_Activity diagram for [http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/dwcdm2dsx.sh]_

=== ozdc_full.awk, ozdc_id.awk ===
The fourth export component are the awk scripts, /amexport/ozdc_full.awk and /amexport/ozdc_id.awk. These
scripts handle the mapping between an emu export and a darwincore csv – they are called on by dwcdm2dsx.sh
to convert data inline before output csv files are written by dwcdm2.sh.

[http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/ozdc_full.awk http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/wiki/FcigDM/am-ozdwc.awk.png]<br>
_Activity diagram for [http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/ozdc_full.awk] and [http://ala-datamob.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/biodomains/fcig-ozcam/am/ozdc_id.awk]_